+++ abstract = "While theory predicts that warmer temperatures may intensify the hydrologic cycle, projecting future changes in extreme precipitation frequency is difficult. In this paper we explore whether a General Circulation Model (GCM) simulates large‐scale atmospheric circulation indices that are associated with regional extreme precipitation (REP) days more accurately than REP days themselves. We show that a coupled Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory GCM simulates too many springtime REP days in the Ohio River Basin in historical (1950‐2005) simulations. The GCM, however, does credibly simulate the distributional and persistence properties of several indices (which represent the large‐scale atmospheric pressure gradient, local atmospheric moisture content, and local vertical velocity) that are shown to modulate the likelihood of REP occurrence in the reanalysis/observational record. We show that simulation of REP events based on the GCM‐based atmospheric indices greatly reduces the bias of GCM REP frequency relative to the observed record. The simulation is conducted via a Bayesian regression model by imposing the empirical relationship between observed REP occurrence and the reanalysis‐based atmospheric indices. Application of this model to future (2006‐2100) representative concentration pathway 8.5 scenario suggests an increasing trend in springtime REP incidence in the study region. The proposed approach of simulating precipitation events of interest, particularly those poorly represented in GCMs, with a statistical model based on climate indices that are reasonably simulated by GCMs could be applied to subseasonal to seasonal forecasts as well as future projections. "

authors = ["David J. Farnham", "James Doss-Gollin", "Upmanu Lall"] date = "2018-03-26" image_preview = "" math = true publication_types = ["2"] publication = "Water Resources Research" publication_short = "" selected = false title = "Regional Extreme Precipitation Events: Robust Inference From Credibly Simulated GCM Variables" url_code = "" url_dataset = "" url_pdf = "" url_project = "" url_slides = "" url_video = ""

[[url_custom]] name = "View Journal Article" url = "//dx.doi.org/10.1002/2017WR021318"

Optional featured image (relative to static/img/ folder).

[header] image = "" caption = ""

+++